# FGSIM - Fine Grid Spatial Interaction Matrix

The objective of this repo is to provide an extension to the hhh4 function of the surveillance package. It allows to use two newly defined weight matrices that shall capture the closeness of administrative districts.

## Idea
To define the closeness of two districts $i$ and $j$, we define that $D_{ij}$ as the distance between two randomly selected individuals, one from district $i$ and one from $j$. Due to the random selection of individuals, $D_{ij}$ is a random variable. The distribution of $D_{ij}$ depends on the selection procedure. We can either select individuals while taking into account how a district's population is distributed across the district or we can select a location inside the district assuming uniform distribution of individuals across the district. Both selection procedures yield a distribution of $D_{ij}$ that is well approximated by a LogNormal distribution. Let $\mu_{ij}$ and $\sigma^2_{ij}$ be the parameters of the LogNormal distribution. Following the idea of powerlaw models, we define raw weights as $$W_{ij} = \text{E}\left(D_{ij}^{-d}\right) = \exp\left(-d \mu_{ij} + \frac{d^2\sigma_{ij}^2}{2}\right)$$ where $d$ is a decay parameter. The parameters $\mu_{ij}$ and $\sigma_{ij}^2$ are estimated by simulation. By the definition of raw weights, we can express the closeness of a district to itself, i.e. $W_{ii}$ is well-defined.

Using a similar idea, gravity model weights can be derived. Let $P_i$ and $P_j$ be the population densities at locations of randomly selected individuals. It is assumed that not only the distance follows a LogNormal distribution, but that the triple $(D_{ij}, P_i, P_j)$ follows a multivariate LogNormal, i.e. the log of the three components follows a multivariate Normal. Let $\mu_{ij}$ and $\Sigma_{ij}$ be the parameters of that distribution. The gravity, or attraction with with an individual of district $i$ is pulled to district $j$, is defined as $$D_{ij}^{-d_1}P_i^{-d_2}P_j^{d_3} .$$
The force of attraction thus decreases with increasing distance between districts and with increasing population density in the district of origin. Districts with larger population densities have a larger attraction on other individuals. Since $D_{ij}$, $P_i$ and $P_j$ are assumed to be random variables, we compute raw weights as
$$W_{ij} = \text{E}\left( D_{ij}^{-d_1}P_i^{-d_2}P_j^{d_3} \right) = \exp\left(d'\mu_{ij} + \frac{d'\Sigma_{ij}d}{2}\right)$$
where $d = (-d_1, -d_2, d_3)'$.

## Code Overview
The repo provides functions for data preparation, that is carried out before the application and functions to compute weight matrices.

`getLNpars.R` contains functions that load data on district boundaries and population density data that is needed to estimate the LogNormal parameters. Population density data is downloaded from [Worldpop](https://www.worldpop.org/), district boundaries are downloaded from [geoBoundaries](https://github.com/wmgeolab/geoBoundaries). Then, points/locations can be sampled using the `wspsample` function and the parameters of the LogNormal estimated using `fitLN`.

`FGSIMdistance.R` provides the function that computes weights not including gravity effects. Similar to the `W_powerlaw` function of the `surveillance` package, it can be used as `W_pdist(maxlag, distPars, normalize, log, initial, from0)`. Setting `maxlag` to a finite integer sets weights to zero if two districts have a neighbouring order larger that the maximum lag selected. `distPars` needs to be a list with two entries `mu` and `sigma2` that contain the mean and variance parameter of the LogNormal distributions. Each needs to be an $n\times n$ matrix where $n$ is the number of districts. `normalize` is set to `TRUE` if the rows of the matrix shall be normalized. If we want to estimate $d$ with the restriction that is positive, we set `log` to `TRUE`. `initial` shall provide a starting value of $d$ for estimation and `from0` can be set to `FALSE` if we want to set diagonal elements of the weight matrix to zero.

`FGSIMgravity.R` provides a weight function that does include gravity effects. Similar to above case, we use is as `W_gravity(maxlag, gravityPars, normalize, log, initial, from0)`. In contrast to the `W_pdist` function, we provide the LogNormal parameters as a list containing entries: `dist, pO, pD, s11, s12, s13, s22, s23, s33`. The former three are the mean parameters for the distance, population in the district of origin and district of destination respectively. `s11`, ... are the elements of the covariance matrix. Each of the nine entries again needs to be an $n \times n$ matrix. The initial values `initial` now needs to be a vector of length 3.
